All right, welcome back.
So in the last lesson, we learned the basics of how to use the grouping by function to literally group
up our record data set by some column, essentially.
OK, now in this lesson, we're going to continue forward with that.
And we're going to learn the next cool thing.
At least what I think is cool, which is how we can actually sum up data or apply other types of collector
methods within the grouping.
OK.
So again, we'll start with the spreadsheet so that you can see visually and conceptually, what am
I talking about if it's not clear?
OK, so jumping back over here to our spreadsheet dataset?
So let's say that we've got this grouping that we have now or this categories or this categorization,
as I think this program calls it, let's say that we want to see the sum total of salaries by state,
right?
So we don't want to just total up all of the salaries for the entire data set anymore.
Now we want to see the total by state, maybe because we want to compare which state, you know, makes
the most money or whatever.
Right?
So in the spreadsheet, the way that I can do this is by selecting this, this header row here in this
row, these these rows here all correspond to the the states, right?
The grouping.
The grouping header, if you will.
OK, so going back over here to the salary so I can come over here and I can click on this little thing
and I can tell it, I want to sum up the data there, right?
So it gives me these nice, easy to use functions right off the bat.
So this is really equivalent to the various functions that that exist on the collectors class, right?
In fact, I think every single one of these mathematical functions here exists on the collectors class.
OK.
All right.
So anyway, we want to sum these up, and there they are, and then we can also format them to look
nicer.
So I will open up the format here and I will choose currency and let's put the separators in there.
And now look at that.
That looks really nice, doesn't it?
OK.
And then what I can also do now, I could even collapse all of these.
Right.
And I can scroll back over here and now we're seeing just these values, but I can do even better than
that.
We're not even paying any attention to any of these middle columns, right?
So what I can also do is select these middle columns that we're not paying any attention to.
And then I can hide them like so and I can get rid of these ones as well.
Outside those high tide.
There they are.
And now look what I've got.
Not only do I have a nice, easy to read mapping of states to sum total of salaries, but I also have
really an easy to see map here.
It's really a very obvious map, right in the Java Sense, right?
Key value, key value pairs right now.
We had that before, even when we were showing all of the records underneath it.
But that might have been a little less obvious to some of you.
The fact that the value inside of our key value pair was a list of people originally right?
But visually, right now, what we're seeing is just an easy mapping of a state to a salary, right?
Nothing could be.
So you couldn't have it be too much more straightforward than that.
And so now we're going to go do this in Java code, and it's pretty simple.
All right.
So jumping back over to the ADP, basically all we need to do is change this bit right here.
OK.
So if you want to think of it this way, when or when we're using this, this three parameter version
of grouping by the first parameter is asking us, What do you want and group by what field do you want
to group by?
This second parameter in this particular case is letting us specify what type of map do we want to use
or what map do we want to use because we can supply the map that we wanted to make use of as we're doing
here.
And then the third column is, what do you want me to do with all of the resulting records for each
category, for each categorization, right?
So in this case, we're telling it just list them out, but we can tell it to do just about any of those
functions that exist on the collector's class.
And you already know that there is a summing function on that collector's class, right?
So if I get rid of this to list here and I invoke the summing long method like so and then you know
that the summing long method wants me to specify what field or column right we want to sum up.
So now it becomes easy again because we can just say person Colin Colin salary just like that.
And we've basically already used this technique before.
We're just using it in an expanded form now.
Now you'll notice that we've got the nasty red marks again.
Can you guess why that is?
OK, so did you get it, so it's because now we're no longer returning a mapping of strings to a list
of people.
Now we're returning a mapping of strings, which are the states to longues, which are the salaries
right?
Just like we're seeing here.
OK.
And so I can just change that.
So now we're getting a mapping of string to long.
And the red marks go away, all right.
And so now if I run this.
Let's see what we get.
There we go.
Look at that really, really short and sweet, right?
Key value pairs, key value.
Key value now, now now one thing to note is I'm no longer using the full data set, but now I can go
back to using that full data set because I won't get inundated with all of the listings of the individual
people, right?
So I'm going to comment that back out and rerun this one more time with the full data set now.
Yeah, there we go.
So now we've got all of the states and their data.
However, you may be noticing that the numbers are not pretty.
Right now, we've learned one way that we could fix this when we use the print F. When we use the print
method, right?
But I bet you're kind of looking at this and looking at our code and thinking, Hmm, how could we use
the print death in this case?
Now there is a way to do that.
However, however, that might not be the most natural thing to do anyway.
Now that we're doing this, all this collector's stuff, right?
So let me show you the collector way that we could format these these values now.
OK, so here we are using the grouping by.
And by the way, I just want to show you something real quick here.
We also could get rid of this tree map if we didn't care about these entries being alphabetized by key.
We could get rid of this and just have the two parameters here in the field that we're grouping by,
followed by the operation that we want to execute on each of the grouped up records, right?
So this middle parameter here is optional as as you saw originally, right?
I just wanted to point that out.
So this last guy is us telling the group by function what to do with all of those records, right?
Well, what if we want to do two things with all of those records or even five things with all those
records?
We don't just want to sum them up, we want to sum them up and then we want to format the result of
that thumbing, right?
So how can we do that?
We want to some and then format.
Well, it just so happens that the collectors class actually gives us kind of like a utility function
called collecting.
And then right.
So in our case, we want to continue summing up.
But then we also want to format.
So what we can do here is if we embed this first operation inside of the end, then clause, if you
will, or the end, then function.
It will allow us to say a next thing that we want to do with the result of the first thing.
So the first thing would be the summing and then the second thing would be the formatting and our case,
right?
So it's actually quite straightforward to use.
So I'm going to I'm going on it.
I'm going to just move this.
Summing long down to a new line, though, just so that it's a little easier for us to see with our
eyes what's going on because these lines are going to start to get a little bit too long.
All right.
So what I can do now is I can refer to the collecting and then function or method, right?
And then I can simply embed.
This summing bit here, I'm going to cut that and just paste it right there.
I can embed that inside of the collecting and then with a comma and then I can supply another operation
that I want to execute on the result of this first operation.
So the first operation within the collecting and then is to sum up all the values.
And then that's going to spit out, in our case, a long.
And then I can supply a lambda or a method reference here as the second parameter to the collecting
and then which will receive that long.
And then I can do whatever I want with that long, right?
So if we want to format along, there are several ways that we could do it.
We could use the string that format.
In fact, I'll show you here so we could we could use a lambda expression that represents the salary.
I'll call that s and then we could say something like string dot format.
And then we could use that the same type of format string that we were using down here.
And in fact, here we'll just do that.
Well, grab all of that.
And paste that right there.
Comma.
S.
Like so now we get the red marks again, because now we're no longer returning a mapping of strings
to longs.
Now we'll be returning the output of this string, that format, which is a string, right?
So now it would be a string, a mapping of string to string.
OK.
Now, I know this is starting to look a little complex, but just take your time and just break it down
and keep thinking back to what we have in the spreadsheet here, right?
To kind of kind of reconcile what you're seeing in the code to what you know you're going to get.
OK, so that's what you would get with this approach, in fact, you know what, let's go ahead and
just run it so I can prove it.
There we go.
So look at that.
Right.
They're all pretty nicely formatted in everything, right?
All right, so that's one way you could do this.
Let me show you another way.
Which is quite similar.
Let's see.
So instead of using the string that format, we could actually use a money format or write a number
format, right?
So we could refer to the number format.
And then we can get a currency instance of it, like so.
And then from here we could just use a method reference and refer to the format method itself.
This format method?
Let me just show you explicitly.
In fact, the real quick format method takes an input of a number, right?
And so if I use a lambda expression again as maps to blah blah blah and then we just throw that into
there, like so?
So, so here we're supplying a lambda expression.
Please forgive the million billion parentheses there that we've got at the end to close off all of this
block of code here.
But here's our lambda expression something that takes a.
Something of type long I'm using ask for salary here, right?
That is coming from the output of the summing long.
Right.
So something long is returning a long, a number of type long and then.
The collecting and then function is passing that output into this second clause here, if you will,
right?
So you've got an input of type along, which is the salary, and then you can do whatever you want with
that.
So we can do a number format that get currency.
And since that format, right?
So we can do this.
We could shorten it a tiny bit by using a method reference so I could get rid of all of that.
And I can get rid of that as well, and I can just replace that with the two.
The two colons there, right?
So in this case, because of the rules of how method references work, the JV team would know that I'm
referring to this method here that takes one input, and it knows that the interface that is expected
here as the second parameter here needs to be a function that can take an input and spit in output out,
right?
And so we can do this.
All right.
And so just to prove that let's just run this also and we shouldn't see any difference.
I don't think we should see any difference, at least.
OK, so there we go, there's all our values still nicely formatted, right?
All right.
And one more thing I want to show you now, what if we wanted to print these out a little more similarly
to how they appear here?
In other words, like one key value pair per per line, right, rather than them printing out horizontally?
We can do that in a number of ways.
Now, this isn't even going to be very related to us using the collect method here.
So note that what's ultimately coming out of this collect call now collect call is in a phone.
What's coming out of this collect call?
Here is a map, right?
And so the map class itself has a number of methods on it.
And one thing that we could do if I move this down to a new line and I'm going to just comment that
out, and I guess I'm going to comment this out as well.
So what I could do now if I hit period right here, I will be looking at methods that exist on the map
class, right?
So I'm going to move down to a new line.
OK.
And then I'm going to hit, period.
All right.
And so now I can use methods of the map class, and one of those methods is for each.
In fact, there's a few there's a few interesting methods that I might want to play with here, but
for now, we'll play with the for each method.
So the cool thing about the for each method is it's pretty much it's very similar to the for each method
that we've used with the Streams API, and it's by design.
It's meant that it's meant to look like that.
And this for each method, though, takes what's called a by consumer.
That's just the fancy name for a particular interface that takes two inputs, right?
So a method that takes two inputs y two inputs.
Well, because this for each method, we'll call whatever function you put inside of it.
As long as that function can take these two inputs, which are the key and the value, OK.
And so for each key value pair.
Think each row here, row, one row to row, three row four, right, these are key value pairs.
So for each key value pair, the for each method will call your function passing in these two values
and then you can do whatever you want with them.
All right.
So.
We can use for each looks.
I didn't mean to do that for each, and I can pass in a lambda.
That takes.
Let's see what will we call these, I guess, state?
And salary.
OK.
And, you know, often I've been using single letter names in my expressions, but in this case, I
just decided to spell them out because I normally would have done the first letter right and that would
have been ambiguous and wouldn't have worked if I'd done SX and SX, right?
So I just wrote them out.
All right.
So state and salary, and maybe what we want to do here is perhaps do a let's see here.
Let's just do a system out of formatted system out.
And so we'll do the state.
And I don't know, maybe a little separator here symbol.
And then the.
Salary and then we need a new line.
And then we can simply refer to the state and the salary like so.
All right.
So let's run that and see what we get.
There we go.
Look at that.
So let's see here.
Three billion.
Now notice our values are huge here versus what we see here, because in the spreadsheet we're only
using what was it, 100 records or so?
Right?
Whereas over here we're using five million records.
So again, we're now, you know, processing the full entire data set, right?
So these numbers are massive at this point.
All right.
OK, now let me see here before we close out on this lesson, let me just talk to you a little bit about
another way that we maybe could have done this as well so that we use the for each here.
But maybe we also could have done just comment that out for a bit and I will do another period.
We also could have maybe referred to the entry set.
So this is a set of entries.
Right?
And again, entries are the individual key value pairs, right?
That's an entry.
OK, so we could refer to the entry set.
And then because it's a set, which is a collection, the collections, as you already know, generally
speaking, offer a stream method right there, right?
And so we could do the stream and then we could do a for each just like that as well, right?
And then we could just pretty much do the exact same thing.
This just cut right to the chase for us, right?
So just another way of looking at it that we could have considered doing as well.
And of course, you always could have just captured the map, and then separately, somewhere else in
another piece of code decided what to do with the data in that map.
Right?
In fact, quite often, keep this in mind.
Typically.
As a professional developer, you won't actually be using print if I've mentioned this before, I'm
just going to reiterate it.
You won't typically be using print f as a real form of output for a professional program in Java.
I would say the most popular use for Java programs, in fact, is either to transfer data back and forth
between various data systems within a an organization or between organizations or and or to convey data
and process data to be interacted with.
In the end, a web browser in the form of a web application.
OK, so you might have some program running in a browser, and that program is communicating with Java
code that runs on a server.
Behind the scenes?
Right?
And so in that case, you'd be writing Java code that might be grabbing all this data and then presenting
that data to a web browser.
OK.
And so you would not be using system out that print and things of this sort.
There are other mechanisms for sending that data basically over the internet or over a network and.
We'll get into a little taste of that, though, that opens up a whole other course that I will be that
I will be producing as well.
All right.
So at any rate, now you've seen a few really cool techniques for not only how to sum up and implement
other easy mathematical functions on data, but also how you can group that data up in various ways.
And in the Latin and in the next lesson, we'll go yet a little further still with a few more things
that we can do with this grouping functionality.
So see you in the next one.